1.Can you explain the role of a data engineer in a data-driven organization?
The primary focus of a data engineer is to design, build, and maintin the systems that enable the collection, storage, processing
and analysis of data.

* Data Acquisition and Integration:
    Data engineers are responsible for acquiring data from various sources, such as Databases, API(application programming interface)s
    and streaming platforms. They design and implement efficient data integration pipelines to ensure smooth and reliable data ingestion.
*Data storage and warehousing:
    Data engineers are involved in designing and implementing data storage solutions that can handle large volumes of data.
    They work technologies like relational databases, data lakes and data warehouses to ensure proper data organization and accessibility.

* Data Transformation and ETL: Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) processes are crucial for transforming raw data into a structured and usable format.
Data engineers build and optimize ETL pipelines to cleanse, validate, and transform data according to the organization's requirements. 
This involves writing scripts or using ETL tools to manipulate and process data efficiently.

* Data Quality and Governance: Data engineers collaborate with data analysts and data scientists to ensure data accuracy, consistency, and reliability.
 They establish data quality standards and implement data governance processes to maintain high-quality data throughout the organization.

* Performance Optimization: Data engineers work on optimizing data pipelines and systems to ensure efficient data processing and storage. 
They monitor system performance, identify bottlenecks, and implement improvements to enhance overall data processing speed and reliability.

* Data Security: Data engineers are responsible for implementing data security measures to protect sensitive data. 
This includes implementing access controls, encryption techniques, and ensuring compliance with data protection regulations.




2.what programming languages and tools are you proficient in for data engineering tasks?
  Python: Python is widely used in data engineering due to its simplicity, extensive libraries (such as Pandas and NumPy), and ecosystem for data processing, manipulation, and integration.

  SQL: SQL (Structured Query Language) is essential for working with relational databases and performing data manipulation, querying, and management tasks. 

  SQL Databases: Relational databases like MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Oracle are commonly used for storing structured data, and I have knowledge of working with them.

  ETL Tools: I have familiarity with popular Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) tools such as Pentaho data integration toop, which is used for data integration and transformation.


3.How do you ensure data quality and reliability in your data engineering projects?

 Data Validation: Implement data validation checks to ensure data accuracy, consistency, and integrity. This can include verifying data types, ranges, formats, and identifying missing or duplicate values.

 Data Cleansing: Perform data cleansing operations to remove inconsistencies, errors, and outliers from the data. This may involve handling missing values, correcting formatting issues, and resolving data discrepancies.

 Data Profiling: Conduct data profiling to gain insights into the data quality. This includes analyzing data patterns, distributions, and identifying any anomalies or data quality issues that need to be addressed.


4.Can you describe the ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) process and its significance in data engineering?

* Extract:
   The extraction phase involves retrieving data from one or more sources, which can include databases, files, APIs, web scraping, or streaming platforms. The goal
   is to gather relavant data required for analysis or storage. Extraction may involve queying databases, pulling data from APIs or reading files

   Significance: Extraction enables the retrieval of data from different sources, consolidating it for further processing or analysis.

* Transform:
  In the transformation phase, the extracted data undergoes a series of operations to convert it into a consistent and usable
  format. Transformations include cleaning, filtering, aggregating, joining, splitting , or applying calculations to the data.
  This step is crucial for ensuring data consistency, quality, and compatability.

  Significance: Transformation aligns the data to meet specific requirements, improves its quality, and prepares it for storage or analysis. It also helps integrate data from different sources and create a unified view. 

* Load:
  The loading phase involves inserting the transformed data into a target destination, such as data warehouse, data lake, or database.
  This step includes defining the data structure, mapping data attributes, and storing the data in the appropriate format
  for efficient storage and retrieval.

  Significance: Loading makes the transformed data available for storage, retrieval, and subsequent analysis. 
  It sets the foundation for data-driven decision-making, reporting, and other data-related tasks. 

5. difference between data base// data warehouse and data lake
  
  * data warehouse is a special type of database which is used for reporting purposes.
    where database is a different types data (used to store in one place) and they regularly change, if we update the data the databases will be changed. But, the 
   warehouses will store the historical records of the data.

   datalake is a place where you could store everything in a semi-structured manner 


6.What is a database and why is it important in software development?

  A database is a structured collecion of data that is organised, stored, and managed to facilitate effiecient data retrieval,
  manipulation, and analysis. It serves as a central repository for storing and accesing data in a software application or system.
  Databases plays a crucial role in software development for several reasons:
  
  Data persistence:
        Databases provide a persistent storage mechanism for application data. They ensure that data is stored securely 
        and can be accessed reliably after the applicatin or system is restarted or shut down.
  Data integrity and Consistency:
       Databases enforce data integrity constraints, such as data types, uniqueness, and relationships between data entities. 
       They help ensure that data is accurate, consistent, and adheres to predefined rules, preventing data inconsistencies and errors.

  Efficient Data Retrieval: 
     Databases are optimized for efficient data retrieval. 
     They use indexing, query optimization, and other techniques to enable fast and selective retrieval of data based on specific criteria. 
     This allows software applications to retrieve the required data quickly and efficiently, improving overall system performance.
  
7.  what are different types of data models? can you explain the differences betweeen them?
   There are several types of database models, each with its own way of structuring and organizing data. The three primary types of database models are:

Hierarchical Model:
The hierarchical model organizes data in a tree-like structure, where each record has a parent-child relationship. 
Records are organized into a hierarchy, with a single root record at the top and child records branching out below. 
Each record can have only one parent but can have multiple children. This model is primarily suited for representing one-to-many relationships. 
It was popular in early database systems but has been largely superseded by other models.

Network Model:
The network model is an extension of the hierarchical model. 
It allows for more complex relationships by allowing records to have multiple parent and child records, forming a network-like structure. 
In this model, records are connected through sets or links, which define the relationships between records. 
The network model is more flexible than the hierarchical model but can be complex to design and manage.

Relational Model:
The relational model is the most widely used database model. 
It organizes data into tables, where each table represents an entity, and the relationships between entities are defined by linking the tables based on common attributes or keys.
The relational model follows the principles of set theory and uses SQL (Structured Query Language) for data manipulation. It provides a simple, tabular representation of data, supports powerful querying capabilities, and ensures data integrity through the use of constraints and normalization techniques.


8. What is the difference between a primary key and a foreign key in a relational database?

   A primary key is a column or combination of columns that uniquely identifies every row in that table.
   It must have unique value for each row, and cannot contain null values
   It enforces entity integrity, ensuring that each record in the table is uniquely identifiable.
   In most relational databases, primary keyys are automatically indexed for fast data retriveal.
   A table can have only one primary key.



  Foreign Key:

   A foreign key is a column or a combination of columns in a table that refers to the primary key of another table.
   It establishes a relationship between two tables, indicating that values in the foreign key column(s) of one table correspond to values in the primary key column(s) of another table.
   It ensures referential integrity, maintaining consistency between related tables.
   The values in the foreign key column(s) can be null or can have values that exist in the referenced primary key column(s).
   A table can have multiple foreign keys, each referring to a different table.



9. Explain the concept of database normalistaion and its benefits.
 Database normalization is a process used in database design to organize and structure tables in a relational database to minimize data redundancy and dependency. 
 The goal of normalization is to eliminate data anomalies and improve data integrity, flexibility, and maintainability. 
 It involves decomposing a table into multiple smaller tables, reducing data duplication and improving the overall efficiency of the database.

 Normalization is typically achieved through a set of guidelines known as normal forms.
 There are several normal forms, including First Normal Form (1NF), Second Normal Form (2NF), Third Normal Form (3NF), and so on, each building on the previous one. 


  Reduces redundant data.
  Provides data consistency within the database.
  More flexible database design.
  Higher database security.
  Better and quicker execution.
  Greater overall database organization.


10.  What is an index in a database? How does it improve query performance?
   
   An index in a database is a data structure that improves query performance by allowing for fast data retrieval.
   An index is created pn one or more columns of a table and serves as a reference to the data stored in that table.

  Fast data retrieval:
       An index acts as a refence to the data stored in a table. Instead of scanning the entire table, the database engine 
       can use the index to quickly locate the specific rows that satisfy a query conditions.
  Improved query performance:
      Indexes can significantly improve query performance, especially for queries that involve search conditions in the where clause.

11. What are the ACID properties in database transactions? Can you explain each of them?

  The Acid properties ensure the readability and integrity of the database transactions.
  Atomicity:
      Atomicity ensures that a transaction is treated as a single indivisible unit of work. It gurantees tha either all 
the changes made within a transaction are successfully committed to the database, or none of them are. If any part of the transaction fails, all the cahnges made up 
to that point are rolled back, leaving the database  in its original state.

  Consistency:
    Consistency ensures that a transaction brings the database from one valid state to anotheer.
    It enforces a set of predefined rules or constraints that must be staisfied for the database to be considered consistent.

  Isolation:
   Isolation ensures that concurrent transactions do not interfere with each other, maintaining data integrity and preventing
   data anomalies. Each transaction must execute in isolation, as if it were the only transaction running on the database.

 Durability:
    Durability guarantees that once a transaction is committed, its changes are permanennt and will survive any
    subbseequent failures, such as power outstages or system crashes. 
     
12. Difference between clustered and non-clustered index
    
   A clustered index defines the order in which data is phisically stored in a table.Table data can be sorted in only way, therefore, there can be only one clustered 
   index per table. In sql server, the primary key constraint auto-matically creates a clustered index on that particular 
   column.

   A non-clustered index doesn't sort the physical data inside the table. In fact, a non-clustered index is stored at one place
   and table data is stored in another place.

13. Difference between SQL and NoSQL
   
   SQL                                                   NoSQL
   Relational Database Management System                 Non-relational or distributed database system.
   (RDBMS)
   These databases have fixed or static                  They have dynamic schemas
   or predefined schema
   These databases are best suited for                   These databases are not so good for complex queries
   complex queries
                                    
   Vertically scalable                                   Horizontally scalable
 
   Follows ACID Property                                 Follows CAP (Consistency, avalability, partition tolerance)


   * SQL databases are table-based, while NoSQL databases are document, key-value, graph or wide-column stores.

14. What is the purpose of the GROUP BY clause in SQL?
  The GROUP BY clause in SQL is used to group rows based on one or more columns and perform aggregate functions on each group.
 
  the group by clause is commonly used in combination with aggregate functions to generate reports, perform data analysis
  and summarize information based on specific criteria or categories.


15. Explain the difference between the WHERE and HAVING clauses in SQL.

   The WHERE clause is used in the SELECT, UPDATE, DELETE, and INSERT statements to filter rows based on specific conditions.
   
   The HAVING clause is used in conjuction with the GROUP BY clause to filter rows based on conditions after grouping and aggregation have taken place.



16. How do you handle NULL values in SQL queries?

  COALESCE:
      

     * The COALESCE function allows  you to substitute a NULL value with a specified value.
        It returns the first non-NULL expression in the list.
        SELECT COALESCE(column_name,'N/A')


17. How do youu optimize query for better performance
   Do not use * in select Statment. ...
   Use Exists instead of Sub Query. ...
   Use Proper join instead of subqueries. ...
   Use “Where” instead of “Having” a clause. ...
   Apply UNION ALL instead of UNION if possible. ...
   Avoid query in a loop. ...
   Apply valid datatype on the column.

18. database transactions:
Database transactions are fundamental to ensure data integrity in database systems. 
They are a way to group a set of database operations together into a single unit of work.
 A transaction represents a logical unit of work that must be performed atomically, meaning it should either be completed in its entirety or not at all. If any part of a transaction fails, the entire transaction is rolled back, and the database returns to its previous state.

The concept of a transaction is often summarized using the acronym ACID, which stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability. Let's take a closer look at each of these principles:

19. Database constraints:
Database constraints are rules or conditions applied to the data in a database table to ensure data integrity and maintain consistency. 
They define restrictions or limitations on the values that can be stored in certain columns or combinations of columns within a table. 
Constraints help enforce business rules and prevent the entry of invalid or inconsistent data.

1.primary key constraint
2.unique costraint
3.not null constraint
4. foreign key constraint
5. check constraint

20. How do you normalise a query for better performance?
Use Indexes:
      Indexes are data structures that improve the speed of data retriieval operations Analyze the query and identify the 
      columns used i the WHERE clause, JOIN conditions or ORDER BY clause.
limit the result set:
optimize joins:
only fectch the necessary columns instead of using selct *
using exists or in instead of using distinct or not in operations can be more effecient.
better to avoid subqueries


21. what are the different methods or techniques you have used for data extraction in ETL process?
Full extraction: 
     This method nvolves extracting the entire source data set in one go. It is useful when the source data volume is 
     relatively small or when all the data need to be extracted.
 Incremental extraction:
            with incremental extracton, only the data has changed or added since the last extraction is retrieved. This approach
             is useful for effieciently capturing changes and reducing the extraction atime and sourxe requirements.


22. How do you handle data transformation and cleansing during the ETL process? Can you provide examples?

Data Format Conversion:
     Convert the data from one format to another to match the target system's requirements. for instance, transforming the
     date/ time values from one format to another
Data Filtering:
Data Aggregation:
       combine and summarize data from multiple source recorde into a single record or consolidated values. Aggregation like 
       SUM,COUNT,AVG,MAX, OR MIN can be used
Data integration:
     combining data from multiple sources into unified format . This includes resolving schema differences, aligning data
     structures handling data merging or joining operations.
Data Cleaning:
Data Parsing and Splitting:
   Splitting single fields into multiple fields or parsing structured data to extract specific elements. 

23. How do you ensure data quality and accuracy during the ETL process?
1. Data Profiling:
     Perform data profiling to understand the characteristics, structure, and quality of source data. Analyze patterns,
     distributions, and data statistics to identify anomalies, inconsistencies, or data quality issues.
2. Data Validation:
  Apply data validation rules and checks to verify the integrity and correctness of the data.

3. Error hadling and Logging:
            Implement robust error handling mechanisms to capture and handle errors encountered during the ETL process. Log error
            details, including error messages, source records, timestamps , and affected fields, This helps in tracking and
            data quality issues.

What strategies do you employ for error handling and data validation in ETL workflows?



24. What strategies do you employ for error handling and data validation in ETL workflows?

1. Data Profiling:
       Perform data profiling before and during ETL process to identify and understand the structure, quality, and 
       potential issues with the data. This helps in designing appropriate error handling and validation tevhniques.
2. Source data vaidation:
         validate the source data before performing any transformation. Check for missing values, data type inconsistencies
         and other data quality issues.
3. Error logging and alerting:
             Implement a robust logging mechanism to capture and track errors encountered during the ETL process. Log relevant
   details such as timestamps, error messages, affected records, and stack traces.




25. Can you explain the concept of change data capture (CDC) and how it can be utilized in ETL processes?

    Change data capture is a technique used to identify and capture the changes made to the source data so that those
changes propogated to a target system or data warehouse. CDC allows you to effieciently track and capture only modified data,
rather than proceesing the entire dataset each time an ETL process runs. This approach minimizes the processing overhead and improves the efficiency of data integration. 


*Metadata injection inserts data from various sources into a transformation at runtime. This insertion reduces repetitive ETL tasks.


ETL metadata Injecction:

The ETL Metadata Injection step inserts data from multiple sources into another transformation at runtime.
 This insertion reduces the need to call repetitive tasks each time a different input source is used.

In PDI, you can create a transformation to use as a template for your repetitive tasks. 
This transformation is known as the template transformation. 
The template transformation is a child transformation that is reused by the ETL Metadata Injection step with the metadata created from various input sources.
You will create another transformation to prepare what common values you want to use as metadata and inject these selected values through the ETL Metadata Injection step into your template transformation, as shown in the following diagram:

The following basic procedure is recommended for using this step to inject metadata:

Optimize your data for injection, such as preparing folder structures and inputs.
Develop transformations for the following task:
The repetitive process (the template transformation)
Metadata injection through the ETL Metadata Injection step
Handling of multiple inputs (as needed)


-----------------------
* Can you explain the concept of data partitioning and how it can improve performance in distributed systems?
   
  Data partitioning is a technique used in distributed systems to horizontally divide a large dataset into smaller,
  more manageable subsets called partitions. Each partition is assigned to a different node or server in the distributed system, allowing for parallel 
  proceesing and improve performance.


* How do you ensure data security and compliance in your data engineering projects?

  data engineers can support a company's compliance efforts;
 
  Data sensitivity:
     How an organization protects data depends on its level of data sensitivity, and data engineers must have a deep 
     understanding of what constitutes sensitive and non-sensitive data. In a compliance-heavy business environment, more 
     sensitive data--- proprietary information, social security numbers, credit card numbers, address-- must have more 
     rigorous when in use.


2. Use Requirements 
   once data is classified for sensitivity, it is much easier to determine how to handle it, depending on what will be done 
   with the data. As we know, data is constantly moving from on-premises to the cloud.


3. Security Controls
Before the great migration to the cloud, data security controls were straightforward: Protect the network's perimeter to prevent unauthorized access to data. 
Since the cloud has no perimeter and data is continuously moving, companies must implement more security controls. And the form of control necessary depends on the data type and usage.








